Climate Change: Causes, Impacts, and Global Challenges

Introduction Climate change represents one of the greatest challenges of
the 21st century. It refers to the progressive increase in the average
temperature of the planet, mainly due to human activities that intensify
the greenhouse effect. Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions – particularly
carbon dioxide (CO₂), methane (CH₄), and nitrous oxide (N₂O) – are at
the heart of this phenomenon. This issue, which transcends borders,
involves unprecedented environmental, economic, social, and political
challenges.

Main Causes The origins of climate change are largely attributed to
anthropogenic activities, including: - The combustion of fossil fuels
(coal, oil, natural gas) for electricity production, transportation, and
industry. - Deforestation, which reduces the biosphere’s capacity to
absorb atmospheric CO₂. - Intensive agriculture, generating significant
methane and nitrous oxide emissions. - Urbanization and land use
changes, which alter local and global climate balances.

Observed and Predicted Consequences The effects of climate change are
multiple and already observable: - Melting glaciers and rising sea
levels, threatening coastal and island regions. - Weather disruptions:
increased frequency and intensity of extreme events (heatwaves, storms,
droughts, floods). - Impacts on biodiversity: species extinction,
ecosystem migration, weakening of food chains. - Socio-economic
consequences: food insecurity, health risks, forced displacement of
populations (“climate refugees”).

Challenges and Issues Addressing climate change poses challenges at
several levels: - Scientific and technological: development of renewable
energies, improved energy efficiency, carbon capture and storage. -
Economic: the need to transform production and consumption models toward
a low-carbon economy. - Political and geopolitical: implementation of
international agreements (Paris Agreement, COP), cooperation between
states, climate justice. - Societal and ethical: raising public
awareness, equity between developed and developing countries,
intergenerational solidarity.

Illustrative Example A striking example is the Arctic, where the
temperature is rising about twice as fast as the global average. The
accelerated melting of sea ice reduces albedo (the Earth’s capacity to
reflect solar radiation), which further amplifies warming – a phenomenon
known as positive feedback.

Conclusion Climate change is a global phenomenon that threatens
ecological balance and the stability of human societies. Its complexity
lies in the interaction of natural and anthropogenic factors, but the
scientific consensus clearly establishes human responsibility. The
climate emergency requires collective action based on emission
reduction, adaptation to inevitable changes, and strengthened
international cooperation. Combating this phenomenon is not only an
environmental imperative but also an ethical and civilizational
challenge for future generations.
